---
lang: en
title: '\#116 (Add/Improve %license tag handling) - rpm - Trac'
---

Ticket \#116 (assigned defect)
==============================

Opened 6 years ago

Last modified 3 years ago

Add/Improve %license tag handling
---------------------------------

  -------------- ------- -------------- ---------------------
  Reported by:   spot    Assigned to:   pmatilai (accepted)
  Priority:      major   Milestone:     
  Component:     rpm     Version:       RPM Development
  Keywords:              Cc:            
                                        
  -------------- ------- -------------- ---------------------

### Description {#comment:description}

Currently, Fedora uses \"%doc\" to mark license texts, but this is not
optimal for many reasons. Some licenses require that the text of the
license always accompany the software, even in scenarios where \--nodocs
would otherwise make sense.

I propose that the %license tag be created to handle license texts.

With this tag, we would now have a way to differentiate the license text
from other documentation. This is important, because in Fedora, we are
currently duplicating common license texts in multiple locations, simply
to ensure compliance. It would be ideal if RPM contained logic along
these lines:

1\. Package marks license text as %license:

> %doc README CHANGELOG %license COPYING

2\. Upon installation, rpm looks in %\_licensedir (customizable, but as
a default suggestion, /usr/share/licenses/) to see if any identical
files (identical to %license) are already present on the system.

3a. If an identical copy is already found in %\_licensedir, do not
install the license text (COPYING), but create it in %\_defaultdocdir as
a hardlink to the copy in %\_licensedir.

3b. If an identical copy is not found in %licensedir, copy the license
text to %\_defaultdocdir.

\*\*\*\*\* That scenario would permit Fedora to create a
\"common-licenses\" package that would be part of a default
installation, and minimize the license footprint.

Change History
--------------

### 07/07/10 21:48:39 changed by james {#comment:1}

Note that I just did:

[http://james.fedorapeople.org/yum/commands/rpmdb-common-files.py](https://web.archive.org/web/20151021001123/http://james.fedorapeople.org/yum/commands/rpmdb-common-files.py)

\...with output here (the above code requires the latest HEAD atm.):

[http://james.fedorapeople.org/yum/commands/rpmdb-common-files-output.txt](https://web.archive.org/web/20151021001123/http://james.fedorapeople.org/yum/commands/rpmdb-common-files-output.txt)

\...doesn\'t seem like a huge win space wise, atm. \... but that might
change with the recent Fedora change for license requirements.

### 07/08/10 14:15:26 changed by pzb {#comment:2}

%license already exists in RPM (has for years). However it behaves more
like %ghost than %doc, IIRC. This means you need to give the full path
to the file, not a relative path. While it does not solve steps 2 and 3,
it should help with the \--nodocs problem.

### 07/08/10 14:16:25 changed by spot {#comment:3}

RPMTAG\_LICENSE exists, but I don\'t believe it is hooked into anything
in the current codebase. Could be wrong.

### 07/09/10 10:42:17 changed by pmatilai {#comment:4}

It \"works\", but is rather broken.

%license qualifier in %files list originates from the days when the
License preamble-tag was known as Copyright, and now there\'s a
namespace collision. So in order to use \"%license /some/path\" you need
to escape with \"%%license /some/path\". But it doesn\'t get used for
anything at all, never was. And it\'s cumbersome to use.

The problem for making %license behave similarly to %doc is that %doc is
implemented in such a godforsakenly hacky way it\'s not extensible at
all. Not saying it can\'t be done, just needs somebody to get around to
rewrite the thing in a saner way (see also ticket
[\#53](53 "[RFE] Allow %doc(type) documentation file flagging (new)")
which is kinda related)

### 05/28/12 14:52:02 changed by pmatilai {#comment:5}

-   **owner** changed from *RpmTickets* to *pmatilai*.
-   **status** changed from *new* to *assigned*.

A big pile of commits (to make the \"special docs\" mechanism a little
less, erm, \"special\") later\...

Just pushed something towards this direction to rpm.org master. No
special install-time copying/relocation/hardlink magic at least so far,
just making %license behave similarly to %doc but placing licenses to a
separate directory structure and \--nodocs will not affect their
installation as they\'re only tagged as license files, not
documentation. So you can now do eg

    %files
    %license COPYING
    %doc README NEWS

%doc does what it always did, %license on non-absolute paths creates
another \"special\" directory (/usr/share/licenses/%{name}-%{version} by
default) where the licenses are copied. Simple and maybe a bit stupid,
but then I\'m not entirely convinced these really deserve any special
install-time magic as they\'re not that big\... and for
space-constrained situations like live-images one can always just run
hardlink on the entire licenses directory. OTOH hardlinking the tree
automatically might be reasonable, I\'ll need to think about the
\"optimization\" part a bit more.

### 05/29/12 14:16:06 changed by spot {#comment:6}

The benefit from hardlinking is reflected by the fact that in the
majority of cases (e.g. GPL/LGPL), COPYING is going to be identical, and
while we need it to be present, we don\'t need 100+ identical copies of
it.

I admit its not a huge size win, but I still think we should try to do
it.
